# The lore link: https://lore.kernel.org/damon/20220810225102.124459-1-sj@kernel.org/


Subject: DAMON Beer/Coffee/Tea chat series
To: damon@lists.linux.dev, linux-damon@amazon.com, linux-damon-trial@amazon.com
Cc: linux-mm@kvack.org, linux-kernel@vger.kernel.org

Hello,


In short, I'd like to start an open, regular, and informal virtual bi-weekly
meeting series for DAMON community.

Important links and dates
-------------------------

Location: https://meet.google.com/ndx-evoc-gbu
Agenda: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1v43Kcj3ly4CYqmAkMaZzLiM2GEnWfgdGbZAH3mi2vpM/edit?usp=sharing

First instance: 2022-08-15 18:00 PDT
Second instance: 2022-08-30 09:00 PDT

Why
---

A number of people have shown interest in DAMON, participated in the
development, and formed a community.  I therefore tried to react to queries,
comments, and share current works and progresses via mails, conferences, and
some virtual meetings.  Nevertheless, that was in somewhat reactive and
occasional manner.  It was sometimes not open to all, and might be too formal.

I hence think we could make it better.  That is, helping each member of the
community to better understand who have what kind of interest in DAMON and what
they are doing at the moment, align their goals, and efficiently collaborate.

Who
---

I hope to meet with anyone having interest in DAMON including but not limited
to kernel developers, user space developers, system administrators,
researchers, students, and whoever.  Only one requirement is to have any kind
of interest in the development and/or usages of DAMON.

How
---

I'd prefer the meeting to be informal for easy communictions.  Just grab a
beer, a coffee, a tea, or whatever you have, join in the meeting, and chat
anything except confidentials (of course!).  No proof of concept or concrete
plan will be needed.  Rather than that, dumb questions and crazy ideas are more
welcome.

For meeting agenda proposal, let's use a public Google doc: 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1v43Kcj3ly4CYqmAkMaZzLiM2GEnWfgdGbZAH3mi2vpM/edit?usp=sharing
The agendas proposed previous to the meeting would have higher priority, but
proposing any agenda during the meeting is also welcome.

Expected topics of the meetings include:

- Introduction of each other (who they are, what kind of interest/expectation
  they have for DAMON),
- Sharing each person or company's current progress and bottlenecks on their
  DAMON development/application works,
- Discussions on possible collaborations on DAMON-related works (both on kernel
  space and user space),
- Discussions on direction and prioritization of DAMON's future,
- Just show each other's face and saying hi, and
- Anything.

So the meetings might cover quite wide ranges of topics.  We could have
separate communications for more focused topics with people who have interest
in the specific topic on demand.  At least, I will try to share my progress and
near future plans in every meeting.

Where
-----

Let's use Google Meet: https://meet.google.com/ndx-evoc-gbu.  I'm using Google
Meet only because I don't have experience in other tools.  If you know better
tools or have concerns about Google Meet, please feel free to let me know.  If
there is any change to the platform or the link, I will share the update to
damon@lists.linux.dev.

When
----

The meeting will be held every two weeks for 30 minutes.  To cover as many
timezones as possible, the meeting will be held once at Monday evening (18:00)
PDT, and then at Tuesday morning (09:00) PDT two weeks after the previous one,
and repeat.  The two time slots will hopefully convince
Asia/Pacific/America-near and America/Europe/Africa/-near people, respectively.
Of course, the meetings could be canceled sometimes.

The first instance will be held at 2022-08-15 (Mon) 18:00 PDT.

               ,_   .  ._. _.  .                                                        ,_
           , _-\','|~\~      ~/      ;-'_   _-'     ,;_;_,    ~~-                   , _-\',
  /~~-\_/-'~'--' \~~| ',    ,'      /  / ~|-_\_/~/~      ~~--~~~~'--_      /~~-\_/-'~'--' \
  /              ,/'-/~ '\ ,' _  , '|,'|~                   ._/-, /~       /              ,
  ~/-'~\_,       '-,| '|. '   ~  ,\ /'~                /    /_  /~         ~/-'~\_,       '
.-~      '|        '',\~|\       _\~ EU  ,_  ,               /|          .-~      '|
          '\  AMER  /'~          |_/~\\,-,~  \ "   ASIA  ,_,/ |                    '\  AMER
           |       /            ._-~'\_ _~|              \ ) /                      |
            \   __-\           '/      ~ |\  \_          /  ~                        \   __
  .,         '\ |,  ~-_      - |          \\_' ~|  /\  \~ ,                .,         '\ |,
               ~-_'  _;       '\  AFRICA   '-,   \,' /\/  |                             ~-_
                 '\_,~'\_       \_ _,       /'    '  |, /|'                               '
                   /     \_       ~ |      /         \  ~'; -,_.
                   |       ~\        |    |  ,        '-_, ,; ~ ~\
                    \,      /        \    / /|            ,-, ,   -,
                     |    ,/          |  |' |/          ,-   ~ \   '.
                    ,|   ,/           \ ,/              \       |
                    /    |             ~                 -~~-, /   _
                    |  ,-'                                    ~    /
                    / ,'                                      ~
                    ',|  ~
          │                                  │ │                                       │
          └──────────────────────────────────┘ └───────────────────────────────────────┘
                   Tuesday morning PDT                     Monday evening PDT

FAQs
----

1. Will this replace the email based communications?

Obviously not.  This is only for complementing the email based communication.
The email based communication, especially the patches review process, will of
course continue.  We might provide some comments on each other's patches during
the meeting, but it should also be sent via email and archived.

2. Can I miss some important information if I don't join the meetings?

Probably no.  I will provide meeting summaries to DAMON mailing list
(damon@lists.linux.dev) if there were important discussions, so you are not
required to join in the meeting series always.  Nevertheless, as it could be
delayed or missed, I'd recommend to join in the meetings if you could.

3. Will the meetings be recorded and shared?

No, unless explicitly required and everyone agreed.

4. Can I discuss about some confidential things?

No.  This meeting series is open for everyone, so please discuss only
non-confidential things.  If you have to or unsure, please have a separate
meeting with appropriate people.

5. Who will organize and lead the meeting series?

I would organize and lead it by default at the beginning, but would be also ok
to be driven by anyone in the community.

6. Should I say something if I join in?

No.  You're welcome to just listen if you don't have anything to say.  I'd
personally recommend people to provide a brief introduction of themselves, but
if you feel uncomfortable about it, of course you can skip.  Simply showing up
your face or name on the screen and saying hi to others would also be great.

7. What's the benefit for me to join in the meeting series?

This would be a good chance to let the people of the community know your
problems, requirements, ongoing works and get helps or avoid unnecessary
conflicts.  Maybe you could make a friend.  It will benefit not only you, but
eventually help the community back.  Making community healthy will again help
you back.  So I'd recommend you to join the meetings if you could, even if you
don't have something special to say.

---

I hope this to help the community to better understand each other, make
good/efficient alignments of each goals on DAMON, and ultimately get some fun
and deliver benefits to the community and the world.

Please leave any comments or questions if you have.


Thanks,
SJ
